---
layout: page
title: Syllabus
group: navigation
---
  
# About the Course

This seminar covers Extensible Markup Language (XML) and its
applications. At times we will also look at alternatives to XML--a
list that includes JSON, YAML, Markdown, etc., which are increasingly
competing with XML for various purposes.

We cover the core XML component frameworks, including DTD, W3 Schema,
Relax-NG, DOM, SAX, XSLT, and XQuery. We'll also look at some
domain-specific instances.

We will also take a quick look at network/web services, which make use
of markup schemes of one form or another. In enterprise computing,
SOAP is a web services framework that makes extensive use of XML to
provide a modern retake on RPC. RESTful web services also take
advantage of XML and other competing forms of markup (JSON) to support
representations (data transfer to and from the web service).

Please note that although HTML will be occasionally used in this
course, this course is not about HTML and students may want to acquire
an HTML book and study it briefly before taking this course. (We'll
cover it during the first week, of course but this is by no means
intended to be exhaustive coverage of HTML or its many variants).


# Contact Information and Office Hours

The preferred method of contact is e-mail (mbone@luc.edu). I
also plan on making extensive use of the forum in sakai. I'll be
keeping an eye on the forum and responding to posts, but you'll also be
able to receive help from your fellow students. Keep in mind that
forum participation will be one consideration for the participation
component of this course.

I'm still working to nail down office hours. At minimum I will be
available the hour before each class, but I will poll the class and
figure out what works best since many of you work or come from other
campuses.


# Prerequisites

All students are expected to have taken Computer Science 271 or have
significant working experience/knowledge with everyday data
structures, especially lists, trees, and associative structures
(e.g. hash tables).  If you are in the MA Digital Humanities program,
you should be taking DH 401 concurrently or have already completed
this course.

Finally, a word of note about programming. You can assume that nearly
all of your work can be done in XML and its various languages (XSLT
and XQuery, among others). It is not expected that you are a strong
programmer but the more knowledge you have thereof, the more fun you
can have with XML. I encourage you to consider pairing up with another
student, especially if programming is not your strong suit.


# Mailing List/Discussion Group

As mentioned above, we will use the sakai forums for group discussion throughout the course.


# Required Book

We will be using the following excellent book:


> Introduction to XML and Web Technologies
>
> Anders Moller and Michael I. Schwartzbach
>
> ISBN: 0321269667


This book can be difficult to obtain. If you are unable to get a copy,
you can get by with the lecture notes and my supplements but will
probably find yourself wanting a copy at some point. You do not need
to own the book from day one.


# Software

OxygenXML Editor: We are grateful to have received a donation from the company that makes OxygenXML software to allow for classroom and individual licenses. Details will be posted on sakai.

Please consider purchasing a personal or business license for OxygenXML in the future, if you find their software to be useful.


# Course Breakdown

* Homework & Project: 65%
* Quizzes: 25%
* Participation: 10%

The following is an explanation of the course breakdown:

- **Homework & Project** Homework will involve working with XML and/or
    other programming languages and sometimes design tools
    (e.g. schema editors).  Homework should be done individually
    unless otherwise noted. The project is obviously an important
    component of this course, and more details will come as the course
    progresses. You should start thinking of potential ideas for
    projects and begin making acquaintances with others with the hope
    of forming a small team. Groups of 3 or fewer may propose a
    project idea at any time. Stay tuned for details.

- **Quizzes** will be used to determine whether you are keeping abreast of the lecture, reading, and assignments.  We will not meet for the final exam session.

- **Participation** will be determined based on your involvement in
    the class in concrete ways. For me, there are multiple ways I can
    measure your participation. The first is to be active in in-class
    discussions and make occasional presentations in class. Ideally, I
    expect every student to speak at least 1-3 times a semester,
    especially when it comes to the discussion of assignments. The
    second is to be active in the class discussion group. I'm
    particularly fond of participation that sheds new insight on
    material that we might not be able to cover in class and postings
    that are aimed at helping others.


# Submitting Homework and Projects

Homework submissions will be handled via sakai. While this is not the
most ideal way of doing things, it'll give us minimal overhead.

For homework assignments and all of your personal work, I encourage
you to use version control with private repositories.  BitBucket is an
excellent solution for this and allows you not only to keep your
source code on the site but also additional material,
e.g. documentation (wiki pages), etc., which normally accompanies a
strong homework and/or project submission.

For projects, you may use a public-hosting solution, especially if you
are considering the idea of working according to free/open source
principles. BitBucket is also a strong solution for publicly-hosted
projects. We also tend to be particularly fond of Google Code but will
not limit you to this way of thinking/expression. Regardless of what
solution you choose, every project is expected to maintain a source
code repository and have a public presence of one form or another.


# Attendance Policy

I do not take attendance in class.

Attendance, however, is strongly encouraged. If you plan to miss
class, it is ok to let me know but, more importantly, please make sure
you speak with at least one other person in class to find out anything
you might have missed. Significant absences from class may hurt your
participation grade.


# Late Work Policy

Late work will be accepted but at a slight penalty. Late work will be
accepted but at a slight penalty for each week of lateness. The
penalty will be 10% per week.

Late work will not be accepted for assignment N once assignment N+1's
due date has arrived. This means, in practice, that a zero will be
recorded for this assignment.


# Quiz/Exam Attendance Policy

Quiz absences require advance notification and/or appropriate
documentation (e.g. doctor's note or documentation from Wellness
Center). Failure to comply with this policy results in a zero on the
given quiz.


# Academic Integrity Policy

See the university web sites in the College of Arts and Sciences and
Graduate School. Any infringement on these policies will result
(possibly) in an F for the course and a report being submitted to the
relevant dean's office.


# Schedule and Lecture Notes

All materials can be found on this website and on sakai.. We will
largely follow the material in the book but will supplement with other
interesting professional and research topics.

